Women’s Health Reports
Volume 3.1, 2022
DOI: 10.1089/whr.2021.0148
Accepted March 22, 2022

Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Open Access

Clinicians’ Perspectives on Racism and Black Women’s
Maternal Health
Brittany D. Chambers,1,2,* Brianne Taylor,2 Tamara Nelson,3 Jessica Harrison,4 Arielle Bell,3
Allison O’Leary,2,5 Helen A. Arega,6 Sepehr Hashemi,6 Safyer McKenzie-Sampson,2,6 Karen A. Scott,5,7
Tina Raine-Bennett,8 Andrea V. Jackson,5 Miriam Kuppermann,2,5,6 and Monica R. McLemore3

Abstract
Objective: The objective of this study was to explore clinician perceptions of how racism affects Black women’s
pregnancy experiences, perinatal care, and birth outcomes.
Materials and Methods: We conducted 25 semi-structured interviews with perinatal care clinicians practicing in
the San Francisco Bay Area ( January to March 2019) who serve racially diverse women. Participants were primar-
ily recruited through ‘‘Dear Perinatal Care Provider’’ email correspondences sent through department listservs.
Culturally concordant, qualitatively trained research assistants conducted all interviews in person. The interviews
ranged from 30 to 60 minutes and were audio-recorded and professionally transcribed verbatim. We used the
constant comparative method consistent with grounded theory to analyze data.
Results: Most participants were obstetrician/gynecologists (n = 11, 44%) or certiﬁed nurse midwives (n = 8, 32%),
had worked in their current role for 1 to 5 years (n = 10, 40%), and identiﬁed as white (n = 16, 64%). Three themes
emerged from the interviews: provision of inequitable care (e.g., I had a woman who had a massive complication
during her labor course and felt like she wasn’t being treated seriously); surveillance of Black women and families
(e.g., A urine tox screen on the Black baby even though it was not indicated, and they didn’t do it on the white baby
when, in fact, it was indicated); and structural care issues (e.g., the history of medical racial experimentation).
Conclusion: Clinicians’ views about how racism is currently operating and negatively impacting Black women’s
care experiences, health outcomes, and well-being in medical institutions will be used to develop a racial equity
training for perinatal care clinicians in collaboration with Black women and clinicians.

Keywords: African Americans; maternal health; racism; women’s health

1Department of Human Ecology, College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA.
2California Preterm Birth Initiative, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
Departments of 3Family Health Care Nursing and 4Social and Behavioral Sciences, School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
Departments of 5Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences and 6Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
7Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
8Medicines360, San Francisco, California, USA.

*Address correspondence to: Brittany D. Chambers, PhD, MPH, Department of Human Ecology, College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA, E-mail: bdchambers@ucdavis.edu

Findings from this study were presented at the 2019 Annual Building Interdisciplinary Research Careers in Women’s Health (BIRCWH) Meeting.

ª Brittany D. Chambers et al., 2022; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
License [CC-BY] (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited.

476

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

477

Introduction
Inequities in adverse maternal and child health out-
comes persist in the United States. Black women are
three to four times more likely to experience compli-
cations during pregnancy and childbirth and die from
these complications compared with white women.1–3
Additionally, infants born to Black women are two
times more likely to be born premature (<37 weeks
of gestation) compared with infants born to white
women.4 Care provided during pregnancy and child-
birth can potentially reduce complications by aiding
in the early detection and successful management of
pre-existing or newly diagnosed comorbid medical
conditions.5–9 Despite the beneﬁts of care during
pregnancy and childbirth, racism serves as a barrier
to Black women accessing and receiving quality
care.5–8,10

Racism is a multifaceted system developed as a tool
to classify groups of people based on physical attri-
butes and characteristics such as skin color, serving
to oppress Black people.11,12 To sustain white suprem-
acy in the United States, laws (e.g., Jim Crow Laws)
and processes (e.g., Redlining) were established to
allocate resources in ways that increased wealth and
opportunity to whites.11,12 Promulgating negative ste-
reotypes and scripts about Black people has added
to these barriers to attaining and sustaining their
economic wealth, bodily autonomy, and liberal
freedoms.11

Stereotypes are perceived notions of a person based
on social and physical attributes, whereas scripts are
ways people are taught or believe they should interact
with people based on their physical and social attri-
butes.13,14 In the context of reproductive health, rac-
ism was used as a tool to establish therapies and
surgical techniques in the ﬁeld of gynecology.15 In
the 19th century, J. Marion Sims performed experi-
mental surgery on enslaved Black women without
their consent to develop a cure for vesicovaginal ﬁstu-
la.15 These experiments facilitated the generations of
two key health care scripts about Black women in
the context of reproductive health care: (1) it is ac-
ceptable to perform procedures on Black women
without their consent; and (2) Black women have a
high tolerance for pain.16,17

Institutionalized racism in health care settings con-
tributes to Black women receiving lower quality of
care in comparison to white women, resulting in
inequities in adverse maternal and child health
outcome.18–24 There is an association between racial

discrimination and Black women’s dissatisfaction
with care, mistrust in providers, non-adherence to med-
ical regimes, and ineffective patient-provider commu-
nication.5–7,25,26 Studies have also shown that poor
quality of care is associated with Black women being
offered fewer or mistimed treatments and interven-
tions.27–29 Research supports that any approach to
improving Black women’s quality of care must address
clinicians’ potential racial biases and racism towards
Black people.30–34

Clinicians’ biases and racism have been shown to be
associated with poor health outcomes among Black
compared with white patients.7,26,30–33,35 van Ryn
et al.31 developed a conceptual framework of racism
and how it impacts clinicians’ cognition, and clinical
decision-making, conveying how structural and insti-
tutional racism contributes to clinicians’ implicit and
explicit racial biases that then inform clinicians’ com-
munication, screening, diagnostic, and treatment be-
haviors. This foundational work has led to a call for
action for health care and grant-making institutions
to address structural factors in an effort to improve
health outcomes for Black, Indigenous, and other peo-
ple of color, proposing a move from cultural to struc-
tural competency.36,37

Curriculums and praxis tailored toward medical stu-
dents and the ﬁeld of obstetrics and gynecology have
used structural competency38 and justice frameworks19
to understand and address racism in prenatal and de-
livery care settings, with a few curriculums recently de-
veloped to focus on clinicians since California’s new
legislation (AB 241 and SB 464) requires continuing
education in implicit bias.37,39,40 Although there is a
plethora of research documenting Black women’s expe-
riences of racism and discrimination while navigating
perinatal care, much less has been reported regard-
ing the relationship between racism and clinical care
through the lens of clinicians’ caring for Black women
during pregnancy and childbirth.

In preparation for the development of a new curric-
ulum, the objective of this study was to explore clini-
cians’ perceptions of how racism affects Black
women’s perinatal experiences and outcomes. Research
suggests that effective components of racial and cul-
tural equity trainings include presenting data that are
relevant to clinicians, providing vignettes of real-life ex-
periences, sharing tools that can be used in clinic, and
implementing quality improvement metrics.41–43 Our
study participants’ stories will be used to develop vi-
gnettes of real-life racist events that have occurred in

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

478

perinatal care settings to guide clinicians through activ-
ities to help them critically think about anti-racist ap-
proaches to providing care.

Materials and Methods
We conducted a qualitative research study with a con-
venience sample of 25 perinatal care clinicians. Clini-
cians were eligible to participate in the study if they
were currently providing perinatal care at one of two
California-based hospital facilities in the San Francisco
Bay Area serving racially diverse women. We recruited
clinicians to participate in the study through ‘‘Dear
Perinatal Care Clinician’’ email correspondence sent
through department listservs and via presentations at
department meetings. We used a semi-structured inter-
view guide to conduct one-on-one interviews with par-
ticipants, who provided informed consent and received
a $50 American Express gift card for their participation.
The interview guide focused on clinicians’ perspec-
tives about the leading factors associated with the per-
sistent racial equity gap between Black and white
women in maternal and child health outcomes, the
role racism may play in these inequities, and the con-
tent and activities these clinicians would like to see
in a racial equity training to improve Black women’s
perinatal care experiences and outcomes. Interviews
were conducted in-person between January and March
2019 by culturally concordant research assistants trained
in qualitative research methods. Interviews ranged be-
tween 30 and 60 minutes and were audio-recorded
and professionally transcribed.

The study team met on a weekly basis during the
data collection process to discuss interview ﬁndings
and emerging themes. Each research assistant wrote
ﬁeld notes within 24 hours of completing each inter-
view to enable them to reﬂect on their interview expe-
rience and summarize key themes and ideas that
emerged. Data collection was stopped once saturation
across key themes and ideas was reached. Upon com-
pletion of the interviews, the study team reviewed tran-
scripts and collectively developed a codebook for data
analysis. The study team used modiﬁed grounded the-
ory techniques, speciﬁcally an iterative process of cod-
ing and analysis and the constant comparative method,
to identify codes and sort them into larger themes.44,45
Two research assistants coded each transcript, with
an inter-rater reliability of 93%. All discrepancies
were discussed, and ﬁnal codes were determined collec-
tively as a team. Quotes throughout this article are la-
beled based on clinicians’ facility (e.g., 01), interview

order for each facility (e.g., 010), role (e.g., obstetricians/
gynecologists [OB/GYN]), and race and/or ethnicity
and gender identity (e.g., Black identiﬁed person).
For example, a label such as ‘‘01-010, OB/GYN, Black
identiﬁed person’’ will follow each quote. All data
were coded and analyzed using Dedoose Version
7.0.23 (Los Angeles, CA, USA). This study was ap-
proved by the institutional review board at the Univer-
sity of California, San Francisco (#18-26494).

Results
Characteristics of our study participants are provided
in Table 1. The 25 perinatal care clinicians we in-
terviewed included OB/GYN (n = 11, 44%), certiﬁed
nurse midwives (CNM) (n = 8, 32%), family medicine
practitioners (n = 2, 8%), and fellows/residents (n = 4,
16%). On average, these clinicians had worked in their
current role for 8.9 years. The majority of the partici-
pants identiﬁed as white (n = 16, 64%) and women
(n = 23, 92%).

Participants shared three distinct ways in which rac-
ism impacts health care systems and care provided to
Black women: (1) provision of inequitable care; (2) sur-
veillance of Black women and families; and (3) struc-
tural care issues.

Theme 1: provision of inequitable care
Provision of inequitable care was deﬁned as racism
inﬂuencing clinicians’ ability to acknowledge and en-
gage Black women as agents of their own bodies and
the care provided by hospitals. Participants described

Table 1. Clinicians’ Characteristics

Characteristic

Role

Certiﬁed nurse midwife
Obstetrician/gynecologist
Family medicine practitioner
Fellow/residents

Time in role (years)

<1
1–5
6
>10

Race/ethnicity

African American/Black
Othera
White

Gender identity

Woman
Man

n (%)

8 (32)
11 (44)
2 (8)
4 (16)

3 (12)
10 (40)
4 (16)
8 (32)

4 (16)
5 (20)
16 (64)

23 (92)
2 (8)

aOther race = Biracial, Middle Eastern, South Asian, and Latinx.

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

479

that racism inﬂuences clinicians’ racist stereotypes and
beliefs about Black women, which results in inadequate
care. An OB/GYN at Facility 1, for example, shared
ideologies and beliefs about
that clinicians’ racist
Black women directly inﬂuence not only the quality
but also the frequency of care offered to Black women
during their pregnancy and birthing experiences.

I think there are times when maybe Black women are assumed
to be less compliant because of their race . or when we’ve
had patients who have come in to triage frequently during
their pregnancies . I think when providers are sort of
stressed by that sort of recurrent presentation . if a patient
is a minority, they may be more likely to sort of trigger peo-
ple’s
(01-002,
OB/GYN, white identiﬁed woman)

clinicians] bad behavior.

[health care

A CNM at Facility 2 shared how racist stereotypes
and beliefs about Black women inﬂuence the type of
care and treatment options offered to Black women
in the postpartum period.

In the realm of family planning, or in the realm of lactation
support, or in the realm of . pain management and labor,
I think there are assumptions based on race that people
like someone might assume . she’s probably not
make,
going to breastfeed anyway so I’m maybe not going to go as
far as I would go in my own commitment or my own perse-
verance in really being supportive. (02-005, CNM, white iden-
tiﬁed woman)

These quotes highlight perceptions

that Black
women inappropriately utilize health care—either too
frequently or not enough—and assumptions about
Black women’s preferences about pregnancy, childbirth,
and parenting, illustrating how racism is an oppressive
system inﬂuencing clinicians’ health care scripts about
how to interact with and care for Black women.

Racism impacts clinicians’ ability to listen to Black
women’s experiences and treat them as equal partners
in decision-making about their own care and treatment
options. A CNM at Facility 1 shared a personal account
of her patient not being listened to while birthing at the
hospital, noting that while her patient was in a life-
threatening situation her expressed level of pain was
disregarded.

I had a woman who . was actually my prenatal patient . she
had a massive complication during her labor course and was
in a lot of pain, felt like she wasn’t being treated seriously.
She had a life-threatening situation, and I felt like she was
not being listened to. She was not. She was not being listened
to . and she was very clear and very vocal while she was in
this state. She kept saying,
‘‘This is why Black and Brown
women die, because you’re not listening to me.’’ (01-010,
CNM, white identiﬁed woman)

Clinicians acknowledged that racism causes and im-
pacts the provision of inequitable care provided to

Black women, highlighting Black women are often dis-
missed and not included as active participants in care
decisions and treatment.

Theme 2: surveillance of Black women and families
Surveillance of Black women and families was deﬁned
as racism inﬂuencing clinicians’ perceptions of Black
women, children, and families, resulting in puni-
tive care and treatment. The most common penalties
shared among clinicians from both facilities were racial
inequities in unwarranted urine toxicology (UTOX)
screening or child protective services (CPS) involve-
ment. For example, a CNM from Facility 2 shared
that Black women are more often penalized for not
showing up for prenatal care appointments than are
white women:

I think that a white woman that misses ﬁve prenatal appoint-
ments probably isn’t going to have a UTOX. The person of
color is going to have a UTOX, like where have you been,
what have you been doing? (02-002, CNM, white identiﬁed
woman)

An OB/GYN from Facility 2 expressed similar con-
cerns around racist
involving a UTOX
treatment
screening that a Black infant received when a white in-
fant in the same setting would not have had one.

When I was in labor and delivery attending a few times ago .
There were two babies. One was white, one was Black, and
they ended up doing a urine tox screen on the Black baby
even though . according to the protocol, it was not indicated,
and they didn’t do it on the white baby when in fact, according
to the protocol, it was indicated. (02-003, OB/GYN, white
identiﬁed woman)

These stories underscore how clinicians’ unethical
UTOX screenings that do not align with protocols
and procedures at their facilities negatively impact
Black women’s care.

A fellow/resident from Facility 2 expressed that ex-
cessive punitive and authoritative actions expand be-
yond Black women and include the policing of their
support persons, particularly in birthing settings.

I’ve seen Black women who have had multiple family mem-
bers who have tried to come visit them or they’ve had other
support people come visit them or even pets or other people
that are part of their community and more often those patients,
their families and their people are seen as disruptive or they’ve
been asked to sign contracts about the number of people who
can be allowed in the room, which, to me, has no medical jus-
tiﬁcation. (02-009, Fellow/Resident, Black identiﬁed woman)

These stories stress how clinicians perpetuate racial
stereotypes of Black women, children, and families,
which can cause harm and disrupt the structure of
the Black family.

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

480

Theme 3: structural care issues
Structural care issues were deﬁned as the historical and
contemporary impact of health care-based racism on
Black women’s reproductive health care experiences
and outcomes. Participants expressed a heightened
awareness of structural racism and how it impacts
both Black women’s health outcomes, medical educa-
tion, and clinicians’ interactions with patients. They
shared that health care institutions in general, and
the ﬁeld of OB/GYN in particular, were established
using racist procedures and protocols to advance the
reproductive health of white women at the expense of
Black women. An OB/GYN from Facility 2 shared
their experiences in learning about and acknowledging
institutional racism and the role it plays in the care cli-
nicians provide to Black women.

We’re learning, now, we’ve always known but it’s being ex-
posed more about the racism inherent in medicine from the
history of medicine in the US, like Dr. Sims and gynecologists
that were experimenting on Black women, as well as the Hen-
rietta Lacks story . So trying to unpack how that translates to
care that people receive or don’t receive right now. (02-008,
OB/GYN, white identiﬁed woman)

Clinicians acknowledged that the ﬁeld of OB/GYN
was built on racist ideologies, beliefs, language, and
behaviors and that there is a need to dismantle the
system to improve Black women’s reproductive health
experiences and outcomes. An OB/GYN from Facility
1 expressed struggling with training students, resi-
dents, and fellows on racial equity without chang-
ing how the current system values and serves Black
women.

Despite the efforts around training trainees or providers in
certain ways are we really challenging the underpinnings of
a structure that is so oppressive and racist . I’ve just been
thinking a lot about this in terms of we’ve now recruited
this very diverse group of trainees, but we still educate them
in the ways that we always have, which is in some ways perpet-
uating sort of white supremacy and hierarchy within our mod-
els. (01-006, OB/GYN, Black identiﬁed woman)

Clinicians also stressed the need for more upstream
policies and interventions to dismantle the historical
and pervasive racist structures and practices to improve
Black women’s care experiences and outcomes.

Although clinicians were aware of structural racism
and how it impacts health care practices and behaviors,
they struggled identifying how racism impacted their
own care practices. A Family Medicine clinician shared:

I think that in our work to undo hundreds and hundreds of
years of not just poor healthcare but sometimes purposely
damaging healthcare, we’ve got a lot of work ahead of us,
and it’s up to us to increase the trust. I don’t expect people

to come into the healthcare setting trusting us, and so that
has to be our work. We have to be proactive, and I’m not ex-
actly sure how to do that. (02-010, Family Medicine, white
identiﬁed woman)

Overall, clinicians stressed that racism is a multifac-
eted issue that will require reﬂexivity among clinicians
to recognize and dismantle their racist ideologies, be-
liefs, language, and behaviors that manifest as acts of
anti-racism, health care racism, and obstetric racism
that led to inequitable care, in addition to restructuring
the current way perinatal care is taught to learners.
Additionally, policies and procedures must be imple-
mented to hold clinicians accountable to provide equi-
table and respectful care to Black women, children, and
families.

Discussion
Three overarching theme emerged from our study
supporting the growing literature on obstetric rac-
ism. Davis deﬁned obstetric racism as the occurrence
and analytic processes, which function at the inter-
sections of medical racism and obstetric violence
inﬂuencing Black women and birthing people’s re-
productive care experiences and conditions, result-
ing in poor health outcomes.43,46 Prior research
suggests that Black women and birthing people expe-
rience maltreatment and preventable adverse out-
comes in perinatal health care settings at higher
rates than white women.27 Findings from our study
underscore the mistreatment experienced by Black
women in health care settings from the perspectives
of perinatal care clinicians and that the root cause is
racism.

Participants in our study shared concerns regarding
the overreporting of Black women, infants, and family
members in relationship to security and police ofﬁcers
in health care settings.36,47 There was an overwhelming
consensus among these clinicians that Black women
and infants receive UTOX screenings at disproportion-
ately higher rates than white women and infants, even
when not indicated.48 Previous research highlights that
Black women are four times as likely to be reported to
CPS compared to white women, even though Black
women are identiﬁed for alcohol/drugs by perinatal
care providers at similar rates to white women and
are more likely to enter treatment during pregnancy.49
Similar to previous research, clinicians from our study
also shared that punitive actions extend beyond Black
women and infants to their support persons, particu-
larly during birth.50

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

481

Clinicians in our study highlight the importance of
understanding the historical and contemporary im-
pacts of structural racism has on Black women’s acces-
sibility to quality care. They stressed that racism is
embedded in the curriculum used to teach future clini-
cians and in the current health care system. They also
shared observation of how racism structures ‘‘care’’
hierarchies, whereby Black women experience differen-
tial treatment resulting in near-death experiences and
other adverse consequences. Clinicians further empha-
sized the importance of acknowledging and addressing
institutional racism in health care settings. They shared
the need to restructure medical and nursing school cur-
ricula to ensure the next generation is equipped with
the skills to provide equitable care to Black women,
and policies to hold themselves and their peers
accountable.

This study contributes to the growing body of liter-
ature importantly examining racism within health
care settings. Uniquely drawing from perinatal care
clinicians’ perspectives, a goal of this research is de-
veloping a tailored racial equity training that re-
sponds to the needs of perinatal care clinicians.
Given the new legislation in California (AB 241) re-
quiring clinicians
to take continuing education
courses to address implicit bias and mistreatment
and improve the quality of care provided to patients,
and additional legislation (SB 464) emphasizing im-
proving pregnancy-related care for Black women, it
is important to talk with clinicians to understand
how racism operates in health care settings from
their perspectives to develop trainings that respond
to their needs.

Despite this call

to action and new legislation,
there are no evidence-based training interventions tai-
lored for perinatal care clinicians that have taken a
community-based approach to include stories from
both Black women and perinatal care clinicians. Data
from this study will be used to create vignettes from
real-life events, rather than hypothetical situations,
allowing clinicians to critically engage with issues that
may arise in their health care settings and practice
strategies to address them.

The major strength of this study is the diverse sam-
ple of perinatal care clinicians we interviewed, en-
abling us to do an in-depth analysis of perceptions
of racism in health care settings from varying perspec-
tives. Limitations include that all clinicians were
recruited from California-based health care facilities
in the San Francisco Bay Area and were practicing

or training in an urban setting. Therefore, study ﬁnd-
ings are not generalize to more rural settings or
among clinicians practicing in states that do not
have legislation requiring racial equity training.
Also, general emails were sent out to all clinicians
and only those who voluntarily responded to partici-
pate were included in the study contributing to selec-
tion bias. It is possible that clinicians interviewed have
an invested interest in advancing racial equity in
health care settings.

Conclusions
Clinicians identiﬁed racism as a key factor disrupting
optimal prenatal care and birthing experiences for
Black women. These clinicians’ experiences support
the need for a racial equity training to address not
only implicit biases but also the history of institutional
racism and multilevel tools that clinicians and health
care institutions can use to improve Black women’s
care experiences and outcomes. Our team is using
these data to develop a tailored racial equity training
uplifting both Black women’s and perinatal care clini-
cian’s experiences.

Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.

Funding Information
This research study was supported by the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development/ Ofﬁce of Research on
Women’s Health-funded K12 [K12 HD052163].

References
1. Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV. Severe maternal morbidity

among delivery and postpartum hospitalizations in the United States.
Obstet Gynecol 2012;120:1029–1036.

2. Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Ko JY, et al. Maternal mortality and morbidity in

the United States: Where are we now? J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2014;
23:3–9.

3. Kassebaum NJ, Bertozzi-Villa A, Coggeshall MS, et al. Global, regional, and
national levels and causes of maternal mortality during 1990–2013: A
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet
2014;384:980–1004.

4. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK, Drake P. Births: Final

data for 2016. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2018;67:1–55.

5. Salm Ward TC, Mazul M, Ngui EM, Bridgewater FD, Harley AE. ‘‘You learn
to go last’’: Perceptions of prenatal care experiences among African-
American women with limited incomes. Matern Child Health J 2013;17:
1753–1759.

6. Nuru-Jeter A, Dominguez TP, Hammond WP, et al. ‘‘It’s the skin you’re in’’:
African-American women talk about their experiences of racism. An ex-
ploratory study to develop measures of racism for birth outcome studies.
Matern Child Health J 2009;13:29–39.

7. Slaughter-Acey JC, Caldwell CH, Misra DP. The inﬂuence of personal and

group racism on entry into prenatal care among African American
women. Womens Health Issues 2013;23:e381–e387.

Chambers, et al.; Women’s Health Report 2022, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/whr.2021.0148

482

8. Nguyen KH, Subramanian SV, Sorensen G, Tsang K, Wright RJ. Inﬂuence of
experiences of racial discrimination and ethnic identity on prenatal
smoking among urban black and Hispanic women. J Epidemiol Com-
munity Health 2012;66:315–321.

9. McCormick MC, Siegel JE. Prenatal care: Effectiveness and implementa-

tion. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

10. Chambers BD, Arabia SE, Arega HA, et al. Exposures to structural racism

and racial discrimination among pregnant and early postpartum Black
Women living in Oakland, California. Stress Health 2020;36:213–219.
11. Jones CP. Levels of racism: A theoretic framework and a gardener’s tale.

Am J Public Health 2000;90:1212–1215.

12. Dominguez TP. Race, racism, and racial disparities in adverse birth out-

comes. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2008;51:360–370.

32. Metzl JM, Hansen H. Structural competency: Theorizing a new medical

engagement with stigma and inequality. Soc Sci Med 2014;103:126–133.
33. Ravenell J, Ogedegbe G. Unconscious bias and real-world hypertension
outcomes: Advancing disparities research. J Gen Intern Med 2014;29:973–975.
34. Kozhimannil KB, Hardeman RR, Henning-Smith C. Maternity care access,
quality, and outcomes: A systems-level perspective on research, clinical,
and policy needs. Semin Perinatol 2017;41:367–374.
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in
America. Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st
century. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2001.

35.

36. Metzl JM, Roberts DE. Structural competency meets structural racism:
Race, politics, and the structure of medical knowledge. Virtual Mentor
2014;16:674–690.

13. Bos AER, Pryor JB, Reeder GD, Stutterheim SE. Stigma: Advances in theory

37. Hardeman RR, Karbeah J, Kozhimannil KB. Applying a critical race lens to

and research. Basic Appl Soc Psychol 2013;35:1–9.

14. Custers EJFM. Thirty years of illness scripts: Theoretical origins and prac-

tical applications. Med Teach 2015;37:457–462.

15. Owens DC. Medical bondage: Race, gender, and the origins of American

Gynecology. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2017.

16. Hoffman KM, Trawalter S, Axt JR, Oliver MN. Racial bias in pain assessment
and treatment recommendations, and false beliefs about biological dif-
ferences between blacks and whites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113:
4296–4301.

17. Hoberman J. Black and blue: The origins and consequences of medical
racism. Berkeley and Los Angeles, California: University of California Press,
2012.
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Understanding and Eliminating
Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Unequal treatment: Con-
fronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care (with CD). Washington,
D.C.: National Academies Press, 2009.

18.

19. Julian Z, Robles D, Whetstone S, et al. Community-informed models of
perinatal and reproductive health services provision: A justice-centered
paradigm toward equity among Black birthing communities. Semin
Perinatol 2020;44:151267.

20. Chambers BD, Baer RJ, McLemore MR, Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL. Using index
of concentration at the extremes as indicators of structural racism to
evaluate the association with preterm birth and infant mortality—
California, 2011–2012. J Urban Health 2019;96:159–170.

relationship-centered care in pregnancy and childbirth: An antidote to
structural racism. Birth 2020;47:3–7.

38. Petty J, Metzl JM, Keeys MR. Developing and evaluating an innovative
structural competency curriculum for pre-health students. J Med
Humanit 2017;38:459–471.

39. Bill Text—AB-241 Implicit bias: Continuing education: Requirements.
Available at: https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient
.xhtml?bill_id=201920200AB241 Accessed August 2, 2021.

40. Bill Text— SB-464 California Food Assistance Program: Eligibility and

beneﬁts. Available at: https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/
billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202120220SB464 Accessed August 7, 2021.
41. Zestcott CA, Blair IV, Stone J. Examining the presence, consequences, and
reduction of implicit bias in health care: A narrative review. Group Process
Intergroup Relat 2016;19:528–542.

42. FitzGerald C, Hurst S. Implicit bias in healthcare professionals: A system-

atic review. BMC Med Ethics 2017;18:19.

43. Scott KA, Davis DA. Obstetric racism: Naming and identifying a way

out of Black women’s adverse medical experiences. Am Anthropol 123:
681–684.

44. Glaser BG. The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Soc

Probl 1965;12:436–445.

45. Constructing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications Ltd. 2021. Available at:
https://uk.sagepub.com/en-gb/eur/constructing-grounded-theory/
book235960 Accessed July 20, 2021.

21. Dyer L, Chambers BD, Crear-Perry J, Theall KP, Wallace M. The Index of

46. Davis DA. Obstetric racism: The racial politics of pregnancy, labor, and

Concentration at the Extremes (ICE) and pregnancy-associated mortality
in Louisiana, 2016–2017. Matern Child Health J 2021:1–9. [Epub ahead of
print]; DOI: 10.1007/s10995-021-03189-1

22. Mendez DD, Doebler DA, Kim KH, Amutah NN, Fabio A, Bodnar LM.

Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and gestational weight gain
and loss. Matern Child Health J 2014;18:1095–1103.

23. Hardeman RR, Chantarat T, Smith ML, Van Riper DC, Mendez DD. Asso-
ciation of residence in high–police contact neighborhoods with preterm
birth among Black and White individuals in Minneapolis. JAMA Netw
Open 2021;4:e2130290.

24. Chambers BD, Erausquin JT, Tanner AE, Nichols TR, Brown-Jeffy S. Testing
the association between traditional and novel indicators of County-Level
structural racism and birth outcomes among Black and White women.
J Racial Ethn Health Disparities. 5:966–977.

25. Ben J, Cormack D, Harris R, Paradies Y. Racism and health service utilisation:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2017;12:e0189900.
26. Attanasio L, Kozhimannil KB. Patient-reported communication quality and
perceived discrimination in maternity care. Med Care 2015;53:863–871.
27. Franck LS, McLemore MR, Cooper N, et al. A novel method for involving
women of color at high risk for preterm birth in research priority setting.
J Vis Exp 2018;131:56220.

28. McLemore MR, Altman MR, Cooper N, Williams S, Rand L, Franck L. Health
care experiences of pregnant, birthing and postnatal women of color at
risk for preterm birth. Soc Sci Med 2018;201:127–135.

29. Vedam S, Stoll K, Taiwo TK, et al. The Giving Voice to Mothers study:

Inequity and mistreatment during pregnancy and childbirth in the United
States. Reprod Health 2019;16:77.

30. van Ryn M, Hardeman R, Phelan SM, et al. medical school experiences

associated with change in implicit racial bias among 3547 students: A Medical
Student CHANGES Study Report. J Gen Intern Med 2015;30:1748–1756.
31. van Ryn M, Burgess DJ, Dovidio JF, et al. The impact of racism on clinician

cognition, behavior, and clinical decision making. Du Bois Rev 2011;8:199–218.

birthing. Med Anthropol 2019;38:560–573.

47. Chambers BD, Arega HA, Arabia SE, et al. Black women’s perspectives on
structural racism across the reproductive lifespan: A conceptual framework
for measurement development. Matern Child Health J 2021;25:402–413.
48. Woodruff K, Scott KA, Roberts SC. Pregnant people’s experiences dis-
cussing their cannabis use with prenatal care providers in a state with
legalized cannabis. Drug Alcohol Depend 2021;227:108998.

49. Roberts SCM, Nuru-Jeter A. Universal screening for alcohol and drug use
and racial disparities in child protective services reporting. J Behav Health
Serv Res 2012;39:3–16.

50. Contributor G. The labor of racism. anthro{dendum}. 2018. Available at:
https://anthrodendum.org/2018/05/07/the-labor-of-racism/ Accessed
July 20, 2021.

Cite this article as: Chambers BD, Taylor B, Nelson T, Harrison J, Bell A,
O’Leary A, Arega HA, Hashemi S, McKenzie-Sampson S, Scott KA,
Raine-Bennett T, Jackson AV, Kuppermann M, McLemore MR (2022)
Clinicians’ perspectives on racism and Black women’s maternal
health, Women’s Health Report 3:1, 476–482, DOI: 10.1089/
whr.2021.0148.

Abbreviations Used

CNM ¼ certiﬁed nurse midwives
CPS ¼ child protective services
OB/GYN ¼ obstetricians/gynecologists

UTOX ¼ urine toxicology

